This is an interview with Herbert L. Curry,
Colonel, United States Marine Corps, by James W.
Hodge, Jr., on 29 November 1988 at Texas A&M
University, College Station, Texas, concerning
the Vietnam War. In the interest of accumulating
knowledge about the war, I'm going to donate this
tape to the Texas A&M Oral History Collection in
the University Archives. Is that all right with
you, sir? Yes, it is. Sir, could you start off with
your date and place of birth? Yes, I was born in
Colorado City, Texas, 26th of July, 1939. Sir,
could you outline your education? Yes, I attended
Texas A&M from 1957 to 1962. I graduated with a
Bachelor of Science degree. Later, I attended the
Naval Postgraduate School. It's the dates where I
have a master's of science degree in management.
Sir, how and why did you join the military? Not
much. I know how, but I'm not sure why. Other than I
was, as a cadet at Texas A&M, I was motivated to fly
and go into the Air Force.
I took my flight physical and found that my eyes
weren't good enough to fly. I decided to join the
Marine Corps. That was in September of 1959.
Since there was not a naval ROTC program at Texas
A&M, I had to use another route or path to get into
the Marine Corps, and I was given a 10-liter
flasher course that they had, which was another
avenue for Actually, the only avenue at that time
for people in Texas A&M was to join the Marine
Corps. I knew others from
OCS. So, did I tell you why and when? Yes, sir. That
was pretty much the how. The how, okay. I don't know
why. All right, sir. Could you have a brief sketch
of your military career before Vietnam? Before
Vietnam, I attended the basic school that all
officers attend, that all Marine officers
attend. I think the basic school is what makes the
Marine Corps unique. This is a school where all
officers attend. It gives you a basic training at a
level above OCS. It's basic training in all
aspects of the Marine Corps, infantry tactics,
from firing artillery weapons and mortars to
understanding about dispersing and supply and
logistics. The beauty of the basic school is that
when you leave there, everyone has a common
background. You speak the same language and you
can converse on any of the subjects. If you're an
infantry officer and you need to talk to a tank
officer or an artillery officer, you both share a
common background, an educational background.
You're the first people in the Marine Corps, and
you can communicate with each other. It really
facilitates getting the mission accomplished.
After attending the basic school, I went to the 3rd
Marine Division in Japan, actually Okinawa. And
while I was there, I was a platoon commander in the
reconnaissance battalion, and later on I became
the executive officer of the company in that same
battalion, and finally the S-4, or the logistics
officer. And I would say that the S-4's job, or the
logistics officer's job, It was probably one of
the best learning times that I've had in my career.
It was a staff officer's job to call up their
captain when I was the first lieutenant. But I had
to deal with so many aspects of running an
organization and supporting an organization. It
placed me in a position where I had to learn what
made all the parts move. I would recommend that to
anyone. Command is fun and great, but you need to
know how to use your support staff. I learned what
it was like to be a support officer and what I could
provide to the line organizations. From Okinawa,
I went to Camp Lejeune, where I became the
executive officer of the company that reports
logistics command. It was called Force Troops at
that time. That's where we had all the heavy
weapons at the support units to support a Marine
division. At that time, we had a concept that the
entire Marine division should be capable, or all
elements of the Marine division should be capable
of being lifted by a helicopter. So the tanks, the
heavy engineering equipment, the amphibian
assault vehicles came out of the division and went
into Force Troops. I was the executive officer of
the headquarters company for a year, and then
after that I was the aide-de-camp to the
commanding general for a year. That was another
good experience, because working at the general
officer level, I saw what factors went into making
decisions at that level. We had the Dominican
Republic crisis at that time where elements of the
1st Marine Division, of course, groups there in
Camp Lejeune went to the Dominican Republic for
that crisis. Of course, we were supporting that as
well as sending forces as well. When my assignment
as aide to camp was completed, I had orders
overseas to the Philippines with my family and
went to a marine barracks where I was a guard
officer for a period of time and then the executive
officer in place. That was in 1964, 1965 and 1966.
We were stationed at Sangley Point, which is on
Manila Bay, about 45 minutes' road distance from
Manila, and 45 minutes by barge across the bay from
Manila. It was a small naval air station where we
flooded support aircraft that were supporting
the war effort in Vietnam throughout, as well as
the Navy had the commander in his path for the
entire Philippines up there. When I completed
that tour in December of 67, I brought my family
back to the States and then went to Camp Penland for
three weeks of training for guerrilla warfare as
well as jungle warfare before going over to
Okinawa in January of 1960. I think I've left
anything out that pretty well rounds out what I did
prior to going to Vietnam. All right, sir. So could
you talk about the date and place of tour in
Vietnam, sir? Before doing that, I might mention
that on my first assignment after basic school, I
went to Vietnam. I was part of the 3rd
Reconnaissance Battalion. About two weeks after
I got to Okinawa, I boarded a ship with my platoon
worked in conjunction with the underwater
demolition team of the 7th Fleet at that time. And
we might have spent three months in Vietnam. In
fact, some three months aboard ship working in the
coastal areas of Vietnam doing all the
hydrographic surveys as well as the land surveys
for amphibious assaults. And that happened from
February to May of 1963. The second time into
Vietnam, I started out as the operations officer
of the Military Police Battalion for six months,
and then I'd ask for a transfer to an infantry
organization. I was able to go up to the 3rd Marine
Division, assumed command of India Company, 3rd
Battalion, 4th Marine.
What was that question? Sir, the date and the place
of tour. Okay. When I was the operations officer of
the 3rd Military Police Battalion, we were
assigned a combat sector in the Da Nang area. We
were north of the Freedom Hill complex, as it was
called, Freedom Hill being north of the Da Nang Air
Base and the headquarters area for the 1st Marine
Division. In a valley occupying the same area as an
ARVN, that's
Republic of the Vietnamese Army Command training
base.
I don't
remember what that was called. But they had a small
training facility in the same valley that we were
located in. But we were the primary force in that
area at that time. We operated – we were assigned to
the southern defense sector around Da Nang, and we
were responsible for the combat operations in
that area as well as the military police functions
in the Da Nang area, more commonly known as the rear
area of the combat
zone.
Before moving up to the 3rd Division, I have to
mention that the 3rd Military Police Battalion
was actually a combat organization, more
designed along infantry lines than the Army
Military Police line. We did run the brig and the
prisoner of war camp. We took everyone else and
made infantry Marines out of them because we were
responsible for defending Da Nang. And as a matter
of fact, the North Vietnamese launched a large
attack on Da Nang. They penetrated the 1st Marine
Division's, I won't say lines, but their security
zone and actually got into the the western corner
of the air base where they met us and one infantry
company that was assigned to us in that area. That
was the big battle at the Cambly Bridge. After that
I went up to the 3rd Marine Division. That was in
August or September of 1968. At that time the
division was located, the division headquarters
was located in
I'm having a mental lapse because I only spent one
night there before going out to my command. Not in
one tree.
I'll pause and then get my map out. I'll
stop that for just a second. All right, sir. Unless
my locations and dates
have me confused, when I flew in, the division
headquarters was located at Don Ha, and then
whenever I left, it was located at Quang Tri.
That's way less correct.
I'm pretty sure it was. I
spent one night at Don Ha to draw my gear and then fly
on out to my company. And to get there, I had to go
through what was called LZ Stud, which was a
helicopter base in the western part of the
Northern I Corps up near the DMZ where we
resupplied
our infantry units, infantry and artillery
units, as well as move the passengers in and out.
That later became Vandergrift Combat Base. I flew
into there, couldn't get a helicopter out for a
couple of days, and then finally, when the weather
was right, got a helicopter that was going out to
the unit, and I was able to get out too. Thank you.
What was the question? It was the place of tour,
your rank. OK. I was a captain at that time. I'd been
in the Marine Corps.
I came in the Marine Corps in January of 62, and so
this was September of 68. Believe
it or not, I was probably one of the senior captains
at that time. Because any time that a country goes
to war, they take the permanent active duty people
and they use them to expand the forces. And when you
do that, you need more people at all levels and
promotions are accelerated. I know as I was, when I
was at Camp Finland, we were going through the
three weeks training. Although I didn't view
myself as a senior captain by old standards, I had
two years in grade as a captain at that time. Some of
the other company commanders or captains that
were going through the training with me had as few
as 22 months in the Marine Corps. They had made a
second lieutenant in 12 months or less, first
lieutenant and then captain. So when it came to an
experience level of captains who were running the
companies in Vietnam, it was rather short in many
cases. So I was considered one of the senior
captains at that time. By today's standards,
though, that's really not the case. Captains have
five, seven or so years of grade before they come
up for major. I made major,
well, Been a captain two years when I got my
company. Maybe two and a half years. I was a company
commander for that period of time. And then I made
major in November of 69. So that gives you an idea of
the accelerated promotions that we had at that
time.
All right, sir. In Vietnam, what job descriptions
did you have? Well, as I said, the first six months,
I was the operations officer of the 3rd Military
Police Battalion.
I orchestrated and controlled all the operations
of that battalion, which included running the
prisoner of war camp, the Marine Corps' military
brig, the Northern I Corps, as well as the combat
security operations. and that zoning defense,
plus the military police actions in the way. And as
a company commander of India Company 3-4, I was
responsible for everything. That was strictly an
infantry combat unit. I was out in the bush
trying to locate, fix, and destroy the North
Vietnamese that were in Northern I-4.
concerning the military operations how did you
and your unit try to fight the war
well at that you have to understand the larger
picture before you can put in perspective how my
unit tried to fight the war we were far enough along
in the war at that time where
The Marine Division, or the units of the Marine
Division, had the combat edge over the North
Vietnamese. First of all, we got air superiority,
which allowed us to fight a war of our choosing. In
other words, the North Vietnamese, because they
did not have air superiority or air parity with us,
were not free to move during the daylight. They'd
roll artillery pieces around or rockets because
they'd be picked up by aerial observers and taken
under fire. So theirs became a war at night,
primarily, as far as movement and getting into
position.
Because we enjoyed that air superiority, we had
the upper hand on the battlefield.
Because it was a political war as well as a military
war, we realized that if we were ever going to get
out of there, we being the administration and the
commanding generals, is that we would have to work
with the Vietnamese forces, train them, and give
them the wherewithal so that they could
eventually stand up against the North Vietnamese
army. And we were in the process of doing that. We
realized that we couldn't control the entire
countryside, in other words, blanket the mass of
people. So we started working out of strategic
positions, key points, key terrain points, where
we could control that and use an approach, working
with the Vietnamese so that they could stand on
their own feet and take over. So ours was a war of
movement. where each company would move roughly
every three days. They would go into a position,
patrol, defend there, try to locate and find the
enemy and destroy them, and then move on. We stayed
on the move. We were on the offensive the whole
time, which kept him off balance because he
couldn't go to a static position and defend there
because once we found him, then we could bring in
massive combat power, the artillery in the air,
and not take him off. So our job as a company was
scouting and patrolling on large-sized unit
level, moving around covering large distances,
hoping to find the North Vietnamese at which time
they would be conferred actual forces on them. I'd
say the worst part, the North Vietnamese were very
good soldiers.
They were not risk-takers. But if they located you
and you didn't move, then they would conduct their
reconnaissance, develop their plans and reverse
them. And when they would attack, if you had been in
that location very long, you knew that you were in
serious trouble. Because they were very
confident in their abilities, they had a good game
plan, and they were prepared to take you out. And
that's – that type of action as opposed to a meeting
engagement where you accidentally run into
people or unexpectedly run into an enemy force and
you have to fight. There we were far superior to
them because we could call in artillery, we could
call in air. Without – except – well, with very few
exceptions, we always came out the victor on those
types of occasions. If you were placed on a hill for
a certain length of time and left there by
yourself, that's a company now of anywhere from 85
to 180 people depending on the strength at that
time.
If it was an attack of his choosing, if you were in
for a good battle, it would take a lot of capital.
All right, sir. What are your training and
experiences in combat?
training prior to combat? MR. Yes, sir.
Of course, the basic school teaches all the
officers the infantry basics, but you can't stop
there with the training. From there, I went on to
the 3rd Reconciliations Battalion, which is an
infantry organization, although it specializes
in reconciliations. You also have an infantry
nation. your
daily
role was to train the execution of that machine. So
that was continuous training in anti-tactics.
That was all the way up through first lieutenant.
From there, when I went to force logistics
command, that was staff work. where you learn what
it takes to support, and that gives you a different
view of operations. But that in itself is
training, not infantry training, but it teaches
you what to call for when you need support. Then
when I went to the Philippines, although that was
Guard duty, we had a training schedule, and we
would go out into the countryside and conduct
infantry training. Here I took great advantage of
the enlisted Marines that I had who had been
assigned there after Vietnam to draw their
experience and techniques, to teach the others,
the Marine parents, what it was like over there,
what you could expect or anticipate, and those
tricks of the trades necessary to survive in the
combat environment. Sir, so that type of training
was your own idea? That's correct. All right. You
were in Pendleton three weeks before you went to
Vietnam? Yes. And what training did you receive
there? There was training there as well. That was
jungle training and survival training. We had
courses that we went through that taught you how to
identify mines and booby traps, taught you how to
be alert for trip wires or activation devices so
that you could avoid those or stop them. Not only
would you avoid them, but everyone else would be
able to avoid those tripwires and explosive
devices. We had infantry training, weapons
training. We had conditioning hikes both day and
night. We had a lot of training in nighttime. It was
an intensive period, an intensive three-week
period
in camp before we boarded aircraft. Were the
instructors there? The folks that had been in
Vietnam? Yes, without exception. They were all
combat veterans. And were the experiences you had
during the training the same that you actually had
in Vietnam when you were fighting? What was the
school, did it adequately prepare you? I don't
think anything adequately prepared you for
combat other than combat.
No, it
didn't prepare me for combat, nor did it prepare
the junior Marines for combat. That's not being
critical of the school. I'm just saying that
nothing can really prepare you for combat. It's a
completely different environment than what
you're accustomed to. For instance, you're out
there in the middle of nowhere, of the Weather
Rifle Company with no visible means of support. I
only rode on trucks one time in six months.
Wherever we went, we either had to walk or there was
a helicopter. All food and water had to be sent by
helicopter. When the weather was bad, we would
have to send details down to the hills and the
mountains, down to the spring bass at the bottom of
the mountains and collect water. We learned that
if we didn't eat all of our rations, we should bury
them, because we might come back to that location
and not be able to have it be resupplied by air. If
that were the case, then we could dig up our old
caches
and re-stash them. Battles or firefights are
short and intense in most cases. and no training to
prepare you for that. If you have a meeting
engagement, complete chaos breaks loose, and you
hope that the training that you had before that, as
well as the training that you conducted in the
combat zone, mentally prepares you to react
without thinking. And most, in all cases, it did, I
guess. But to give you an example, an ambush is
probably the most difficult situation in the
ground response. You're in a killing zone, the
enemy is standing waiting for you, and he springs
the trap on you, so to speak. The only way to get out
is to fight your way out. You can't hit the ground,
because there's no protective cover there. They
chose the site to have this. You've got to turn in
the directions of the guns that are firing at you,
and assault them. And that's got to be reflex
action, because every second that you stay in that
killing zone, it's more dangerous. We can train to
do that and condition people to do it. But until
they've actually been fired at in anger, we're not
prepared. Yeah. In other words, it's a shock the
first time it happens. Yes, the training that goes
on beforehand, the peacetime training, the
training that goes on just prior to going out into a
combat zone, is mental conditioning. Teach
Marines to instantly obey orders. If someone
hollers, ambush right, most of the people would
automatically face to the right and start firing.
So, yes, that training was impactful. Not only is
training prior to getting to a combat zone
important, you've got to continue training when
you get into a combat zone. You're not engaged in
the enemy every day. You may go three weeks or two
months without engaging. That was because of that
type of war. But that's not uncommon in other wars
either. When you're not engaged, you're out
patrolling, you're in your defensive positions,
you're firing your support weapons. That's
training as well as actual operations. But for
those people that aren't out conducting the
patrol or ambulance, in the daytime, you need to be
having classes for those people, practical and
proficient. It's not like standing down to a
no-sweat garrison environment back in the States
because the threat's always there if you haven't
maintained proper security. But as far as basic
things like proper digging of a fighting hole,
clearing fields of fire, proper scouting and
patrolling techniques, setting up your fans of
fire for your various weapons systems. That still
takes training. You've got to remember that most
of the Marines that went over there came right out
of boot camp, and they haven't had the opportunity
or did not have the opportunity to be in an infantry
organization for a year or two years before they
got there and learn all these skills and refine all
these skills. They're just a basic movement
together. So unless you want your unit to fight at
its lowest combat denominator, that being the
least trained person, you've got to continue with
the training program in combat to improve those
skills that they receive in boot camp and in the
training school. And that just takes a conscious
effort, because there's not a formal training
program as we have it in peacetime. But each
company commander needs to work out the program
and do those types of things. All right. Sir, I need
to change the table. OK.